# 1. Mathematical Optimization

## What is mathematical optimization?
Mathematical optimization is used to mathematically describe our decision problems and then, algorithms, to solve them. The models consist of three components:

- **decision variables** which correspond to actions or choices that we have to make in our decision problem: the height of water in the lemonade glass, or in other problems, whether to open a new manufacturing facility, which supply routes to use, or for which prices we should sell our products. 
- **objective function** which is used to evaluate a specific solution (i.e. a specific choice of values for the decision variables introduced earlier). For the objective function, a "goal" should be specified, either _maximize_ or _minimize_ it -- in the glass example, we aimed to minimize the height of the center of gravity. In other applications, the objective can be to minimize operational costs or to maximize the number of satisfied customers.
- **constraints** that restrict the possible values of our decision variables, i.e., conditions that must be satisfied. Other common examples of constraints are to require that a maximum allowed budget is satisfied, that all demand of important customers is met, or that the capacities of warehouses are not exceeded. The constraints define the **feasible region** of our model, i.e., the set of all solutions that meet the constraints.

The goal of an optimization model is to find a **global optimum**: a feasible selection of the decision variable's values leading to the best objective function value. 

Applied mathematical optimization requires three types of skills, which can be related to three fundamental questions:
- **What to model?** First, the modeler must translate a problem from the real world to an abstracted mathematical representation. Not every aspect of the real world can or should be taken into account by the model, so there are many choices to be made in this first step, which typically have a significant impact on the model and solution approach.
- **How to model?** There can be multiple equivalent model formulations. Conceptually, equivalent models solve the same optimization problem, but the applicable solution approaches or computational complexity may differ.
- **How to interpret the model's solution?** After solving the model, the solution has to be evaluated and translated back to the original real-world problem

These three aspects should be treated as a continuous process, not as sequential steps. For example, if the final solution turns out to be impractical, we need to adjust the model. If certain desired properties cannot be modeled efficiently, perhaps we should re-evaluate what to include in the model. A mathematical model is a tool, not a goal (well, except for mathematicians to study). A model is "always flawed" and our challenge is to make a model useful.

Mathematically, we can describe optimization problems as follows. Given an objective function $f: X \to \mathbb{R}$ to be minimized, with $X\subseteq \mathbb R^n$ being the set of **feasible set** of candidate solutions we seek to find $x \in X$ satisfying the following condition $f(y) \geq f(c) \quad \forall \, y \in X$, i.e., that the solution we find is at least as good as all other possible solutions. Similarly, we can define a **maximization problem** by changing the last condition into $f(y) \leq f(x) \quad \forall \, y \in X$. In both cases, we refer to such solutions as **optimal solutions**. The general way to formulate a minimization problem is:

$$
\begin{align*}
        \min \quad &f(x)  \\
        \text{s.t.} \quad & x \in X,
\end{align*}
$$

and similarly for a maximization problem. Different types of function $f$ and set $X$ lead to different types of optimization problems and to different solution techniques.

In this introductory chapter, we explore two simple examples of optimization problems:

* [A first example of optimization problem](glass-water.ipynb)

Go to the [next chapter](../02/02.00.md) about linear optimization.